#summary Quick start guide to using SeqTrace

= Getting started with !SeqTrace =

This document provides a streamlined introduction to using !SeqTrace.  For a more in-depth discussion of !SeqTrace and its features, see the other "how to use !SeqTrace" wiki pages.

== Installing !SeqTrace ==

Obviously, you will need to install !SeqTrace first.  This is usually a simple process that might not involve much more than downloading the latest !SeqTrace release and uncompressing the archive, depending on your system.  See the [Installation installation guide] for details and follow the instructions for your operating system.

Some users will be interested in improving !SeqTrace's performance or running !SeqTrace's unit tests; these topics are covered in the [AdvancedInstallationTopics advanced installation instructions].  Most users will not need to worry about these more complicated tasks.

== Viewing sequencing trace files ==

If you only have a small number of trace files to process or you simply want to view a sequencing chromatogram, you can open trace files directly in !SeqTrace without first creating a !SeqTrace project.  From the "File" menu, select "Open trace file...", then choose a trace file to open.  This will open the sequencing file and display it in the trace view window.

The key components of the trace view window are identified in Figure 1.

From the trace view window, you can:
  * zoom and scroll the sequencing chromatogram
  * edit the called DNA bases
  * export the DNA sequence to other file formats, such as FASTA

For more information about the trace view window, see the [TraceViewWindow detailed explanation] of its features and controls.